# 01 computer on paper

## Brainfuck and Turing machine: what is a computer?

Brainfuck is one programming language with only eight instructions. Brainfuck is also a computer that transforms the input of instructions into a string of texts or numbers. It is a variant of Turing machine. It is as powerful as any existing computers with just limited means of input and output.

As a computer, BF has three main parts:
* an array of memory cells arranged along a line
  * each cell has the initial value of zero
  * each cell has an address 
  * the address of the first cell is zero, the address of the second cell is one, and so on
  * the number of cells is big enough to hold any programs
* a pointer that can be moved along the cells according to the instructions
  * at the start, the pointer points to the first cell
* a processor that is capable to move the pointer, read and write to a memory cell according to the instructions

As a programming language, BF has eight instructions:

| Operator | Description |
| :-------: | :---------- |
| ```>``` | Move the pointer to the right |
| ```<``` | Move the pointer to the left |
| ```+``` | Increment the memory cell at the pointer |
| ```-``` | Decrement the memory cell at the pointer |
| ```.``` | Output the character of the cell at the pointer |
| ```,``` | Input a character and store its value in the cell at the pointer |
| ```[``` | Jump past the matching ] if the value of cell at the pointer is 0 |
| ```]``` | Jump back to the matching [ if the value of cell at the pointer is nonzero |

## BF programs: hello computer

Check out the program of hello-world written in BF. The example section inside https://esolangs.org/wiki/Brainfuck.

Then check out the visualizer to show you how the program is executed in another browser-based application, https://brainfuck-visualizer.herokuapp.com

## How to write the code for a BF computer?

Think backward, that is, starting from the final result expected. Then reverse.

### ASCII table

Any character has a value as defined in the ASCII table. More if we go to Unicode, many letters and symbols could be found there.

For example, the string of ```Hello world!``` is actually a string of numbers defined in the ASCII table, 72, 101, 108, 108, 111, 32, 119, 111, 114, 108, 100, 33.

### How to print out a string of ```ABC```?

Check out the ASCII table: A has the value of 65, B 66, and C 67.

Now how can we get A? One easy but tedious way to get A is to have 65 of instruction ```+```, then use ```.``` to output that value in a cell. Another way is to use the looping instructions, ```[``` as the start, ```]``` as the end the loop, when the value of a cell pointed by the pointer decremented to zero, the looping stops.

```
+++++ set cell #0 to 5
[
 >+++++ +++++ +++ set cell #1 to 13
 [
  >+ set cell #2 to 1 * 13 * 5 => 65
  <- decrement the loop counter in cell #1
 ]
 <- decrement the loop counter in cell #0
]
cell no: 0  1  2  
value:   0  0  65
pointer: ^
>>. cell #2 has the value of 65
cell no: 0  1  2  
value:   0  0  65
pointer:       ^
+.  cell #2 has the value of 66
+.  cell #2 has the value of 67
```

So the code without comments is as follows:

```
+++++[>+++++++++++++[>+<-]<-]>>.+.+.
```

The value of new line in the ASCII table is 10.

Now we a value of 67 in the cell #3. Let us code a 10.

```
>+++++ cell #4
[
 >++ cell #5
 <-  decrement loop count in cell #4
]
>. output cell #5
```

Add some code to output a new line into cell #5
```
>+++++[>++<-]>.
```

The complete code is as follows:

```
+++++[>+++++++++++++[>+<-]<-]>>.+.+.>+++++[>++<-]>.
```

Here the method is to calculate first, then output. We calculate A into cell #3 first, then output the value of cell #3. Then calculate B in cell #3, output. Then C. The last is to calculate a new line, which has the value of 10. We need a loop count in cell #4 and store the value in cell #5. After the calculation, we output the value in cell #5.

#### exercises

* Life101

| Char | L | i | f | e | Newline |
| ---- | - | - | - | - | ------- |
| ASCII value | 76 | 105 | 102 | 101 | 10 |

The approach is to calculate ```L``` and ```i``` first. Then based on the value of ```i``` to calculate ```f``` and ```e```.

The patterns are here:

```
76 = 75 + 1 = 5*5*3 + 1
105 = 7*5*3
```
 
Code:
```
+++
[
>+++++
[
 >+++++
 >+++++ ++
 <<-
]
<-
]
cells:  0 1 2  3
value:  0 0 75 105
pointer ^
>>+.
>.
---.
-.
```

Add the last value of 10, the complete code without comments:
```
+++[>+++++[>+++++>+++++++<<-]<-]>>+.>.---.-.>+++++[>++<-]>.
```

The above just reuse the code of calculating the value of 10 which is a new line in the ASCII table.

### how to run the code?

There are many ways to run the code. You can build a BF interpreter in C, python, C++, JavaScript, and so on. 

Here is one online version, https://copy.sh/brainfuck/. Another, https://sange.fi/esoteric/brainfuck/impl/interp/i.html
 
### notes

the code size, the memory size used, the speed of the code.

